																	Increasing IT-Security breaches and the extensively growing loss due to fraud related incidents cause the need for being prepared for a digital investigation. A specific capability maturity model can assist organizations to determine their current state according to implement digital forensic readiness measures and get assistance to reach a desired level in having related capabilities implemented. This paper examines how such a model can assist in integrating digital forensic readiness related measures and to reach an appropriate maturity level. Through facilitating core elements of the IT-Governance framework COBIT 5 and the core characteristics of implementing digital forensic readiness a proposal for a specific capability maturity model has been conducted. In five maturity levels (Initial, Managed, Defined, Quantitatively Managed and Optimized) the different stages of implementing digital forensic readiness measures are represented. It can be shown that with the IT-Governance aligned model the implementation of digital forensic readiness can be assisted."																						
"The forensic sciences generally deal with the application of scientific methods for investigations in legal cases [18]. In this context, forensic scientists must adapt questions of a legal case into scientific questions and answer these by using appropriate and scientifically  validated  methods [9, 13]. This requires a well-defined and well-founded knowledge base and a scientific method as well as an experimental base [8, 26]. Following this argumentation, digital forensics is understood as a forensic science that deals with the application of methods from computer sci- ence to questions of the legal system [9]. In detail, this means, that digital forensics provides methods to preserve and process digital evidence which guarantee the highest	possible objectivity in digital forensic investigations [9]. Nowadays, conducting a digital forensic investigation can be challenging due to the large data sets which need to be stored and analyzed. By facilitating scientifically proven forensic techniques a digital investigation with any data size can be supported. The scientific methods enable the processing, i.e. preservation, analyzation, interpretation and presentation of digital evidence in a proper manner. Also the integrity of possible evidence is protected, which enables that the evidence stands up in a court of law [26]."																							
Tan [34] initially mentioned DFR in 2001 and defined it as a mechanism to minimize the costs of digital forensic investigations and to maximize the capability of an orga- nization to collect evidence with a correct legal reliability. Pangalos and Katos [27] extended this definition as ‘‘the state of the organization where certain controls are in place in order to facilitate the digital forensic process and to assist in the anticipation of unauthorized actions shown to be disruptive to planned operations’’. This definition emphasizes the aspect that it is crucial to pursue a proper support of the entire forensic process. The focus is also turned away from just producing credible digital evidence and adds the anticipatory perspective into DFR.																				
Digital Forensics is a relatively young scientifically discipline. Also the research in DFR has been conducted from many different views and perspectives. For example, Reyes and Wiles [29] analyze the allocation of adequate resources. The selection and usage of adequate technology has been researched by Carrier and Spafford [4]. Training initiatives are discussed in [4, 30]. Also legal investigation, incident response and policies have been analyzed according DFR [1, 5, 31, 34]. Most of these publications just discuss a selected aspect of DFR. The need for whole organizations to be forensi- cally ready by regulations has been increased in the past years. This leads towards a comprehensive view on DFR within an organization.  Implementing DFR measures is cost intensive and the desired economical return is lower than in other projects. This puts organizations into the need to balance the costs of being forensically ready and the positive effect of being prepared in case of a digital investigation. The last aspect includes the capability to produce and preserve digital evidences in an efficient way [29, 30]."																				
Carrier and Spafford [4] also distinguish Forensic Readiness between operational readiness and infrastruc- tural readiness. The operational readiness  can be deter- mined by adequate provision of training and equipment present for individuals who are involved in digital forensic activities.  Infrastructural  readiness  can  be  reached  by establishing possibilities to preserve evidences appropri- ately. Rowlingson [30] covers these elements and proposes a clustering of forensic related activities in planning, policing, training and monitoring. These elements support the achievement of DFR massively [30]. Further important aspects of DFR have been stated by Grobler et al. [12]. There DFR is considered a proactive forensic activity. They also mention that the culture and governance of an organization should be considered in DFR implementation. The tight alignment of implementing DFR measures with the management of an organization can assist to fulfill this aspect [12]. By virtue of the high complexity according to Forensic Readiness initiatives in large scaled companies, Reddy and Venter [28] propose a Forensic Readiness management system. This  system supports in managing Forensic Readiness effectively within an organization. Based on the work of Tan [30, 34, 35] the authors define requirements to the Forensic Readiness management system."																				
Elyas et al. [11] present an expert perspective on their theoretical framework which is a holistic guidance on how an organization can  become forensically  ready. The framework consists of a set of Forensic Factors within various areas of forensic readiness and a set of Forensic Readiness Capabilities. Ivtchenko and Sachowski [15] consider the implemen- tation of DFR measures from a business perspective and their work serves as a guideline for establishing the nec- essary DFR measures in an organization. The areas, people, processes and technologies are considered in a purposeful way. These areas are addressed holistically but without using an IT-Governance framework."																				
2.3  Capability maturity model																				
Capability maturity models in the area of information technology are generally focused on development-pro- cesses and phases within organizations and the involved Information Systems. They build a sound fundamental base for their evaluation according quality assessment. There- fore, the structure of the model is based on a stepwise progress for improvements. Every step acts as an assess- ment for quantity of processes and methods from enter- prises and systems. Based within this assessment approach, corresponding options for improving and options for actions can be derived. Due to the structure of the model the steps are in a chronological order and are built on each other. This sequence shows how an approach for improvement could be designed [7]. By applying this model, a user can determine the current position of an organization according their capabilities and the quality of various services. A capability maturity model also offers assistance for the development of the enterprise or involved elements of an organization [7]. Based on [7] three main goals of a capability maturity model can be noted: (a) A quality assessment of an orga- nization  with  its  processes  and  information  systems (b) Providing a base for benchmarking with competitors. (c) Show an approach for (quality) improvements. A CMM is mainly based on a documentation of the processes and systems within an organization and can involve increased bureaucracy which makes an application of CMM complex and expensive [16]. Nevertheless, a CMM can provide a significant benefit to organizations and responsible employees by providing a systematic schema for determining their current positions for a competitive and future oriented development. The most famous and proven capability maturity models in the area of software development are Capability Matu- rity Model Integration (CMMI) and Software Process Improvement and Capability Determination (SPICE). In this paper, these models are used as a baseline for devel- oping a capability maturity model for digital forensic readiness.																				
2.4  Related work																				
"Kerrigan [19] performed a study how prepared companies in Ireland are with reference to digital investigations. He provides a CMM including various measures for the implementation of Forensic Readiness. The model provides a possibility to assess the forensic capabilities of an enterprise. In this context, the author emphasizes that the highest goal of the model must not be reached compul- sively. This level of the capability maturity model involves significant costs and efforts to be reached. The application of the assessment by facilitating the model has been con- ducted in ten organizations located in Ireland. Additionally, Kerrigan has proposed a capability maturity model for digital investigations named the Digital Investigation Capability Maturity Model (DI-CMM). This model can be applied as a tool for analyzing the investigation capabilities within an organization. The author defined digital investi- gation capability maturity levels and enriched these with detailed descriptions. Their work also shows with the application of the objective oriented maturity model in a real-life organization that there is a significant difference to the organizations’ subjective assessment according their digital investigation capabilities. As a conclusion a majority of the organizations over-estimated their capa- bilities according digital investigations [19].																				
Chryssanthou and Katos [6] present a framework for assessing forensic readiness. The suggested framework is based on the Systems Security Engineering-Capability Maturity  Model  (SSE-CMM).  The  purposed  maturity assessment framework has been built up by specifying five different Process Areas (PA). The authors used generic phases of a digital investigation by mapping them to PAs: Identification, Acquisition, Examination, Analysis and Re- porting. The assessment framework for digital forensic has been extended by elements from incident response. The following PAs have been added: Monitoring, Detection, Response and Restore. The forensic readiness levels are used by Chryssanthou and Katos by applying the assessment model in a fictitious scenario with an example company. The assessment is based on linking the PAs to suitable questions. After the fictitious company was questioned, a forensic readiness profile was retrieved. The work shows that the assessment of forensic readiness can be handled with a capability maturity approach. Nevertheless, the development of this capability maturity approach does not follow a compre- hensive way and the model cannot be applied to implement DFR holistically. In contrast to the approaches described above we present an approach to develop a DFR specific CMM with the intention to cover DFR implementing initiatives holisti- cally within an organization. Karie and Karume [17] state that the implementation of DFR in organizations is still a current challenge due to the fact that decision-makers need to understand and pursue the implementation of proactive measures to respond to an incident and to establish a digital forensic ready environment. To smoothen the implementation, the approach pre- sented here provides IT-Governance oriented support to reach a desired level in having DFR capabilities present. This approach addresses the government and management as well as decision-makers of an organization as they may already be familiar with elements from the area of IT- Governance.																				
3 Capability model development approach																				
In recent years, several different applications and variations of maturity models have been developed. They have been implemented across a multitude of domains. The base model was the CMM from the Software Engineering Institute of the Carnegie Mellon University. The increased development of different capability models in various business areas has also shown downsides. Publications of capability maturity models show, that the models or con- cepts are not scientifically proven according to their development process. A few models seem to be developed as a marketing instrument of a consulting or software development company. The documentation about the development process of a model is also often poorly prepared [2]. To overcome this pitfall, the development of a capability maturity model for DFR in this work underlies a strict and transparent methodology. For this, various con- cepts for the development of a capability maturity model are described and a specific approach is selected and adopted."																				
3.1  Baseline model																				
Becker et al. [2] provide a scientifically proven principle for developing a capability maturity model. They define and differ five important phases within the developing process: Definition of the problem, comparison of existing models, defining a development strategy, iterative development of the model and concepts for transfer and evaluation. The intended development of a digital forensic readiness maturity model in this work uses a general development framework provided by De Bruin et al. [3]. The framework presents a guideline to develop a theoretically sound, rigorously tested and widely accepted matu- rity model. The suggested framework consists of the phases Scope, Design, Populate, Test, Deploy and Maintain."																				
3.2  Definition of the maturity levels for the DFR CMM																				
"The representation of capability profiles is not unrestrict- edly applicable for comparing capabilities of an organization with others or companies within the same branch. Due to the fact that the intended capability maturity model is based on the CMMI, essential elements of CMMI can be reused. The CMMI has defined maturity levels to allow an overall assessment of the maturity of an organization. This reorientation of a maturity level aligns to a specific selection of PAs. They should cover the intended assessment holistically. This approach supports the assessment of the whole organization and enables an inter-organizational comparison. To provide this holistic assessment of an organization according DFR including all relevant evalu- ation domains, five maturity levels have been defined. Based on the core concept of the CMMI [7] and the systematic provided by [19] the following maturity levels are defined. Aspects of [6, 19, 28] also influenced the definition of the levels."																				
Level 1 Level 1 represents non-existing measures according DFR. This is general characterized by having no formalization and a digital forensic investigation is performed chaotically and unstructured. There are also no standards or documentations about how a process should be performed. Knowledge about DF and the importance of keeping traces secure and useful for a court of law are not present within the organization. Level 2 Level 2 defines basic elements in performing DFR  related  activities.  For  example,  there  is  a  low  or minimal formalization of procedures in the case of a digital investigation. Also a repeatability in various processes is recognizable. Additionally, a basic documentation is present. In this level, minor DFR aspects are fulfilled and DFR is addressed as a relevant topic inside the organization. It is noticeable that these initiatives are not enough if a real investigation needs to be conducted. Level 3 Level 3 provides a solid base in performing DFR activities. At this level an organization has standardized forensic procedures, compressively documented processes and formal trainings. The involved staff has an accept- able understanding of DF and its consequences. This empowers an organization that potential failures in an early stage of a forensic investigation are prevented. According to Tan, the increased usability of evidences is an eminent aspect of DFR [34]. By having measures at this level in place can additionally save costs within a digital investigation. Level 4 Level 4 describes an advanced state of having DFR initiatives in place. Beyond the previous levels and aspects, this level focuses on a professional implementation of DFR. For example, DFR is an enterprise-wide and strategic issue. At this level the support of an executive manager is committed and various process improvement measures are in place. Level 5 The highest level of the model is represented as level 5. The achievement of this level implies a full implementation of DFR including a continuous improve- ment of DFR related measures and structures. With the definition of process improvement objectives, implement- ing formal staff training and a corresponding accreditation this level can be reached.																				
4 The digital forensic capability maturity model																				
Based on the development approach, suggested in Sect. 3, and  the  distilled  requirement  of  DFR,  presented  in Sect. 2.2, the following DFR capability maturity model has been developed by conducting and presenting the various maturity levels of the DFR CMM. For each level the main characteristic processes, people and technology are exam- ined and used in the description. The maturity level of the DFR CMM are described in Table 1. Besides the first level, each maturity level needs every previous maturity level to be completely fulfilled. A specific maturity level can be seen as accomplished if all included PAs satisfy the highest capability level. In our approach each maturity level is aligned to a set of capability levels across the seven enabler of COBIT 5 [14]. These capability levels are defined in Table 2 and can be measured  by  querying  an  organization  selected  DFR related  questions.  These  questions  represent  indicators which are present or not. Some measures for implementing DFR need the support by the management or governance of an organization. Due to the fact that the model is built by facilitating IT-Governance principles from COBIT 5, the enabler concept provides a future-orientated guideline for a continuous improvement within the organization. This approach results in an overview of goals the seven enablers need to achieve to successfully implement DFR. With this DFR specific CMM a comprehensive and detailed justifi- cation of the intended progress can be reached. The relation between capability and maturity levels and their possible definitions are presented in Fig. 1. In this figure also a possible linkage between capability levels and the enabler concept of COBIT 5 is illustrated. The capability level of a specific enabler can be deter- mined by questioning a company or responsible person a set of indicators. Each indicator can be asked and evaluated individually. In the context of implementing DFR, two different types of indicators are used. On the one hand, mandatory indicators are used to define measures or structures which are necessary to reach a specific capability level. These indicators need to be fulfilled by an adequate implementation within the organization. On the other hand, optional indi- cators are defined. These indicators are not compulsory. They can be fulfilled to support a specification or charac- teristic of DFR capabilities. Such elements are expressly welcomed but not an essential element of having DFR measures in place at the assigned capability level. However, these optional indicators can become mandatory in the future if the requirements in DFR are changing or an implementation of higher DFR capabilities is intended. They can be seen as suggestions for an optimal implementation of the capability level. In ‘‘Appendix 1’’ the Tables 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 show mandatory and optional indicators for determining the capability level of an enabler. Table 11 provides an overview about the neces- sary capability levels per enabler for having a specific maturity level. The minimal necessity to have DFR in place is the maturity level 3. As a negative side effect this could mislead managers to think the organization is fully prepared at this level. Even if the minimal level for DFR is reached by an organization, it is necessary to pursue a further devel- opment. This guarantees a higher application and faster response to changing circumstances around DFR. The higher levels, Level 4 and 5, assist to set up necessary requirements to faster adopt new demands in DFR.																	
5 Application of the model													
The following section presents a prototypical implementation of the model to demonstrate the practical usage of the theoretical model. Furthermore, publicly available information about the Target Corp. Data Breach [32] is used for a small case study to determine the maturity level of the organization at the time of the breach.																			
5.1  Implementation															The previously proposed model for determining a com- pany’s digital forensic readiness maturity level is based on querying indicators to determine the capability levels. This mechanism was implemented as a web-based application.1 The indicators shown in the Tables 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 in Appendix A have been translated into questions and stored in a MySQL database. The logic to determine the capa- bility level and the maturity level was implemented with JavaScript. If a company undergoes such an assessment, a skilled professional can evaluate the indicators, grouped by COBIT 5 enablers, according to the current situation. As soon as sufficient questions for the determination of the maturity level have been answered, the tool presents the result. The result consists of the capability levels of the company per enabler, the level of maturity achieved and a list with the answered indicators. With these results, specific areas of the company can be developed to achieve the DFR objectives.																			
5.2  Evaluation of the model														The applicability of the model is tested by using informa- tion about the Target Corp. Data Breach [32] as a baseline for a case study. In November and December 2013, the company suffered a until then unique security breach. Attackers penetrated the company’s network via a third party vendor and compromised point of sale devices with malware. This made it possible for the attacker to collect 40 million card numbers and 70 million personal entries. This data was afterwards offered for sale  on the black market. This case was chosen because it occurred despite enor- mous  previously  established  IT  security  measures.  The case has been under investigation for several years and faces significant barriers to capture the cybercriminals [32]. Subsequently, the seven enablers are examined accord- ing  to  the  implemented  measures  for  DFR  before  the incident. Further the level of capability of the respective enabler is determined and finally the level of maturity is derived. Enabler principles, policies and frameworks The employed Chief Information Officer before the incident had no background in computer science. Management also decided not to follow warnings and advices of a recently installed IT security tool and decided not to re-evaluate the systems. In addition, advices from security experts to the management were ignored. The fact that after the incident the position as Chief Information Officer was filled with a candidate with the appropriate experience also shows that there was no knowledge present about the correct proce- dure in case of an incident. [33] The analysis of the case shows that the Target Corp. was repeatedly warned about the incident by the protection systems and that the employees did not initiate the correct actions [23]. This analysis allows to conclude that besides the man- agement’s lack of understanding of IT security measures, the establishment of suitable principles, policies and frameworks according DF measures was not fully established and therefore no regulations for DFR were implemented. Enabler processes It can be assumed that the company has a good understanding of its business processes, since a crucial security function of the point of sale devices had just been deactivated in order to not slow down the check out process of the customer [33]. Target Corp. had implemented good IT security measures, but the handling of messages from the systems was not correct among the employees due to inadequate training [32]. As a result, the knowledge of a correct procedure in case of an incident could not be implemented.																				
Enabler organizational structures After the breach a new CIO was announced and a 100 million dollar plan for enhancing their security has been promoted. Therein the enhancement of security of various accounts as well as reviewing and limiting vendor access has been addresses. Especially the insufficient implementation of access con- trol by different groups and third party partners made the attack feasible [32]. This allows the conclusion that central elements of the organizational structure were insufficiently developed.		Enabler information It is not clear whether sufficient internal information about the handling of digital evidence was available. However, it is well known that major investments were made in IT security tools and measures. These included the network security system named Fire- Eye, which includes a Network Intrusion Detection System (NIDS) [32]. These tools usually also include possibilities to obtain evidence for a forensic investigation. Since dif- ferent prevention functionalities were deactivated due to lack of knowledge of the administrators [32] it is assumed that further possibilities of the system were also not or insufficiently known among relevant stakeholder. Enabler culture, ethics and behavior Little is known about the culture, ethics and behavior before the incident. It is assumed that the data breach was not performed or ini- tiated by an insider [32]. However, employee awareness of IT security incidents was partially suppressed for business- enhancing convenience [23]. Therefore, for the use case presented here, it is assumed that a fraud intolerant culture exists in the company and that the employees do not hinder an investigation. How- ever, in some cases this is overshadowed by measures that threaten IT security for the purpose of promoting direct business goals. Enabler people, skills and competences It can be seen that before the attack, management had already been informed about IT security weaknesses but did not follow the recommendations of experts [33]. The lack of knowledge about the consequences of dis- abling important security warnings in intrusion detection systems combined with the result that employees still do not follow the procedure of the system is critical. This shows that the employees have been insufficiently trained [23]. It is assumed that in this use case not only the teaching of relevant IT security skills and competences but also the DF trainings have failed. Enabler services, infrastructure and applications The Target Corp. had extensive ambitions to keep the IT security in the company up-to-date and running. Before the data breach, for example, a malware detection tool was implemented in the company for 1.6 USD. In addition, extensive evaluations of the existing IT security measures were regularly undertaken. [23] In summary, Target has taken extensive measures to increase IT security and has even deployed a network intrusion system. As mentioned before, these tools also have the ability to acquire usable evidence. For this use case the expected capability level in the area of services, infrastructure and applications is therefore defined as managed.	
